Monica Alicea
Data Science Insight 1

                                                          The ɸ-sat
 
 On September 3, 2020, the European Space Agency (ESA) launched the world’s first earth observation satellite with artificial intelligence (AI). The AI chip, named ɸ-sat (PhiSat), is designed to process satellite images and recognize and remove images that are obscured by cloud cover. The ɸ-sat is believed to be the first step in using AI to create more efficient and effective earth observation techniques. 

  In 2017, the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya proposed the idea of a small constellation of satellites that would provide data on the Earth’s soil moisture content and ice coverings. This idea was developed by the ESA into the Federated Satellite Systems mission (FSSCat). The satellites use dual microwave and hyperspectral optical instruments to capture images of the Earth. These images allow for consistent monitoring of changes in vegetation, water quality, and other important earth features. While the satellites successfully capture terabytes of data, a challenge the FSSCat faces is determining which of the enormous number of pictures are usable, particularly in a timely manner. 

  The company *cosine Remote Sensing* constructed an AI algorithm that can detect when a satellite image has too much cloud coverage to provide useable data. The AI algorithm is held on a chip called the ɸ-sat. When added to the satellites, the AI processes incoming images, detects the level of cloud coverage, and discards images that are not suitable. The ɸ-sat is able to clean terabytes of data quickly and with high accuracy. This allows the Copernicus Land and Marine Environment service to receive good quality Earth images at an unprecedented speed. 

  The ɸ-sat has important applications to agent-based modelling because of its impact on Earth imaging and because of the precedent it sets for integrating AI into future geospatial projects. ɸ-sat provides a unique opportunity for data scientists to obtain timely, clean images of the Earth. This allows data scientists to maintain up-to-date models pertaining to weather patterns, soil moisture, ice coverings, topography, vegetation, and much more. 

  Furthermore, learning about the ɸ-sat reveals a need for more incorporation of AI into Earth observation tools. As current consumers of maps and earth images, it is important for us to understand the limitations of the data available to us. Learning about the common issues faced by Earth imaging—like cloud coverings—and understanding how AI can be used to fix those issues is critical for future data scientists like ourselves. 

  Fascinatingly, the ESA has already recognized this importance of the ɸ-sat’s technology and has begun a push towards incorporating more AI into satellites. As early as November of 2019, the ESA announced the development of a successor to ɸ-sat—ɸ-Sat-2. ɸ-Sat-2 is being developed to address a wide range of issues. ESA hopes that ɸ-Sat-2 will use AI to transform satellite images into street maps, do autonomous detection and classification of maritime vessels, monitor forests and land anomalies, and do improved cloud detection in satellite images. The expanded capabilities of ɸ-Sat-2 have endless applications to data science. Mostly, the ɸ-Sat-2 acts an important reminder to data scientists that our most important skill is looking to the future of the field, identifying the current limitations, and creating something that breaks those boundaries.
