Data Science Insight 2

                                                                Flood Modeling
                                                      

Every year, millions of people are affected by flooding. As one of the most common natural disasters on Earth, flooding causes the displacement, injury, and death of humans and animals all across the world. Floods even affect the economy, causing billions of dollars of damage a year. To better fight the effects of this natural disaster, Google has been using AI to improve flood forecasting in the most flood-heavy countries in the world—India and Bangladesh. On September 3rd, the Google team announced their newest improvement in flood forecasting technology, the “morphological inundation model”. The morphological inundation model uses machine learning techniques to produce flood forecasting with an unprecedented accuracy.   

Google is consistently working to improve the accuracy, reach, and lead-time of flood forecasting. Their latest technological advancement in the field has been the creation of a new technique for inundation modeling (also known as flood modeling), called morphological inundation modeling. Typically, inundation models use a physics-based model to predict flooding in an area. Satellite images are used to create a digital map of an area called an “elevation map”. Many calculations are then done to predict what real-time water flow would look like in the elevation map. These calculations usually make inundation modeling a complex process.  

Morphological inundation models combine a physics-based model with machine learning (ML) to create a simpler and more effective flood forecast. The morphological inundation model begins with an ML model that makes a one-dimensional profile of the river. The inputs are water levels at specific points in the river and the output is entire river profile, which tells you the water levels of all points in the river. This model is used to edit the region’s elevation map by cancelling out the pressure gradient that would exist if flooding occurred. With this edited elevation map, they can use a simple flood-fill algorithm to model the flood behavior. 

This new method of inundation modeling led to an R2 score of more than 99% across all covered basins and predicting the water level within a 15 cm error bound more than 90% of the time. These statistics show an unprecedented amount of accuracy and clarity in flood modeling. Furthermore, the expanded use of elevation models allowed the application of this technology across even more of India and Bangladesh than before, leading to the coverage of more than 250 million people. 

The ability to forecast the size and severity of floods is crucial to creating informed agent-based models. If a region is likely to become flooded, agent-based modeling is the most effective tool for predicting the movements of people as they flee the area. Accurate flood modeling becomes increasingly important as climate change worsens and sea levels continue to rise. If we can accurately predict how coastal regions will be flooded, we can determine how many people, animals, and homes will be affected. This can allow people the chance to either prepare for flooding or flee. Using agent-based modeling, we can predict how much infrastructure needs to be put in place to facilitate helping people move and to support those who stay with resources. As such, we can see that Google’s morphological inundation model and overall dedication to improving flood forecasting is beneficial not only to agent-based modeling but also humanity. 

                                                                    Source
https://ai.googleblog.com/2020/09/the-technology-behind-our-recent.html?m=1

                                                  
