**Using  these  ideas  from  Aral,  Georgescu-Roegen,  and  Geoff  West  as  well  as  other sources  from  this  semester  (including  your  own  personal  insights  and  reflections), how  is  the  advent  of  data  science  and  its  use  in  agent-based  modeling  serving  to advance our understanding of complex adaptive, economic and social systems?**


Humans have long argued that we are each completely unique, independent and free-willed. However, with the advent of data science, we have for the first time been able to measure human behavior en masse. Agent-based modeling is a product of this data, a tool for successfully capturing the behavior of independent individuals, finding patterns in the group, and predicting the behavior of the system as a whole. By modeling complex, adaptive systems, data science and agent-based modeling are helping humans understand the extent to which human behavior is truly unique. This, in turn, informs data scientists of the ethical limitations that should be placed on agent-based models. 

Sinan Aral states, “revolutions in science have often been preceded by revolutions in measurement.” In the age of technology, we have access to an unprecedented amount of data. The quantity and breadth of data available has allowed us to measure almost every aspect of human behavior. We know that all humans are driven by their basic need for physical and emotional satisfaction. With our revolutionized ability to measure human behavior, we can find patterns among individuals that allow us to predict the movement of the entire system. For example, during the COVID-19 crisis, we understand that at a physical level people must go to the grocery store for food, go to an essential job to make money, go outside to get exercise, and more. Additionally, we understand that human beings have emotional needs, like spending time with family and friends. This information could allow us to create an agent-based model to predict the rate at which the virus will spread, and at what areas it is more likely to spread.

While we can predict many of these behaviors, this model would also be affected by many of the independent decisions of humans. Some people choose not to wear a mask or practice social distancing by going to large social gatherings. Others take precautionary measures to the other extreme, they stay confined to the comfort of their homes, getting groceries delivered and refusing to see visitors, even while masked. Level of caution affects the accuracy of a model, but is completely dependent on every individual’s decision. From this, we see that an agent-based model can highlight the level at which free-will truly affects complex systems. 

Over time, and with the collection of enough data, an agent-based model could predict the general level of caution a group of people practices. However, this raises ethical issues over what limitations should be placed on predictive modeling.  Agent based modelling can cause harm by breaching privacy.  An individual’s location is very personal and private data, and many individuals would not consent to sharing their location data. Location data can expose a lot of personal things about an individual, by recognizing their daily patterns. While there are benefits to understand where more risky individuals live and the effects their actions could have on the community, it is not ethical to track individuals, even for the purpose of bettering a model. 

The advancement of data collection and thus the measurement of human behavior has opened many doors in data science. The ability to model a complex, adaptive system is a benefit in many scenarios. However, we must continue to be cautious of the balance of using agent-based models in order to predict commonalities in human behavior and to respect the importance of humans exhibiting free-will, even if it means limiting a model’s ability. 
